So let's talk about the future of
Artificial Intelligence
in robo-Advice,
especially as it relates to
interactions with
customers directly.
The definition of robo-advisors
and robo-advisory activities
is fairly fuzzy.
It originally meant, a kind
of business model organized
around algorithms
to reduce costs of
client service
disintermediating humans.
However, today that
definition has changed.
Now we think of it as
a financial advisory, firm,
a practice, and enterprise
in the financial
services industry,
using an algorithm to build
a customer allocation,
based on automated and
usually online inputs.
Those so-called robo-advisors
usually provide,
capture of client
information, their goals,
their capacity,
their preferences,
or their tolerance
for taking risk.
It includes output of
portfolio allocations,
or a set of portfolio
allocations or options,
for clients to choose.
It could also include
automated rebalancing
of positions across time,
or across market
conditions change,
or it could involve
and in some cases
reportedly does
tax loss harvesting,
or optimal rebalancing
of taxable portfolios.
Finally of course,
automated reporting
which an industry that
has found automated
reporting to be,
at least historically
challenging, a welcome feature.
Theoretically speaking
because algorithms and
artificially oriented bots
can learn from experience,
perhaps they can become more
personal and more human,
and therefore more
relatable across time.
Perhaps they can also make
more responsible
decisions however,
recent market
experience including
across periods of
market volatility,
suggests that most clients
are comfortable
without human oversight
at some point.
In part that comes down to trust
or the lack of trust
and algorithms,
especially in the face of
uncertainty about the outcomes
of the algorithm.
Two of the largest
so-called robots
that are independent of
larger firms namely,
Wealthfront and
Betterment, both have
"client services
representatives" as an example.
As far as we know
no "pure" vision of
the original robo-notion
has been achieved.
However, the model is incredibly
useful because it
sets a baseline,
and ultimately a
cost-based competitor.
The traditional human only model,
almost surely where
it's all going,
will involve what we
now call a bionic
model linking humans
and algorithms,
and hopefully the best
of both worlds together.
As you might recall,
growth has been
tremendous in this area.
Vanguard Personal
Advisor Services
rebranded as a Robo
in May of 2015,
then had around $21
billion in assets,
as of 2018, it had
over $100 billion.
Wealthfront the independent Robo,
currently has over $11 billion,
and Betterment now has 16.5,
90 percent of Wealthfront assets
are actually allocate
the Vanguard funds.
Although the business
strategies of
these two large
independent robo-firms
has differed for example,
Betterment recently shifted
its business model to
emphasize defined contribution
retirement plan activities,
as opposed to purely
non-taxable DC business,
both have seen traumatic growth.
In addition, traditional
brokerage firms
including discount
brokerage firms,
have offered robot-like
offerings including Schwab,
Bank of America Merrill
Lynch, and Fidelity.